Document:       Portable Bridge Notation (PBN)
Version:        2.1
Date:           2007.05.17
Coordinator:    Tis Veugen ( tis.veugen@iae.nl )
Co-editor:      Kaj G Backas (kgb@sackab.fi )
Authors:        Readers of the Internet newsgroup rec.games.bridge


Table of contents
=================

1.  Introduction
1.1  Design criteria
1.2  Example game
1.3  Relationship to PGN
2.  File layout
2.1  Import format and export format
2.2  Character set
2.3  Line specification
2.4  Escape mechanism
3.  Game layout
3.1  Game sections
3.2  Tokens
3.3  Tag pair
3.4  Identification section
3.5  Auction section
3.6  Play section
3.7  Numeric Annotation Glyphs
3.8  Commentary
3.9  Irregularities
3.10 End positions
3.11 Case sensitivity
4.  Supplemental tags
4.1  Game related information
4.2  Score related information
4.3  Player related information
4.4  Event related information
4.5  Time and date related information
4.6  Time control
4.7  Miscellaneous
4.8  Tag value inheritance
4.9  Expandability
4.10 Compatibility
5.  Supplemental sections
5.1  General description
5.2  Description of tables
5.3  ActionTable
5.4  AuctionTimeTable
5.5  InstantScoreTable
5.6	 OptimumPlayTable
5.7	 OptimumResultTable
5.8  PlayTimeTable
5.9  ScoreTable
5.10 TotalScoreTable
6.  File issues
6.1  File name
6.2  File embedding
7.  PBN software


1.  Introduction
----------------
  In the past years a lot of bridge computer programs have been developed.
There are programs for dealing, bidding, playing, and/or teaching.  A
widely accepted standard format for bridge games does not exist.  Therefore,
the output of one program can't be used in another program.  This not only
holds for programs running on different computer platforms, but even for
programs on one and the same computer.
  This document specifies a universal notation for bridge games, called
"Portable Bridge Notation" (PBN).  PBN is based on "Portable Game Notation"
(PGN), a standard for the representation of chess games.
  The current PBN 2.0 standard has been released on 1999.09.01 and it will
be frozen until 2000.09.01 . At that time an evaluation will be made for
a possible update.
  The PBN 1.0 standard has been released on 1998.04.01 and it has been
frozen until 1999.04.01 . The PBN 2.0 standard is an update to PBN 1.0 .
This does not mean that the PBN 1.0 standard is invalid. PBN files obeying
the PBN 1.0 standard are fully compliant to the PBN 2.0 standard.


1.1  Design criteria
--------------------
  PBN has been designed with several criteria in mind.  Portability is of
course the main criterion.  Other criteria are:

1) PBN is an open standard. It is publicly available for users and
   software developers. PBN is not subject to any copyrights.

2) The PBN notation must be straightforward and comprehensible. 
   A human must be able to read and write the PBN notation easily.

3) PBN must be suitable for a variety of computer programs.  It can be used
   by dealing programs, bidding programs, playing programs, etc.  The PBN
   files range from single deals to large databases.  Examples of database
   contents are:
   (a) tournament database
   (b) famous player database
   (c) database with 7NT deals

4) PBN must be able to serve as an interface between competing computer
   programs.

5) The PBN standard must be expandable.

6) The PBN notation must be worldwide applicable.

7) The syntax of the PBN notation must be easy to parse by a computer
   program.

  The PBN standard is based on textual files, instead of binary files.
A lot of PBN data, including comment, are text strings. Therefore, low
priority is given to minimization of file sizes.


1.2  Example game
-----------------
  An example game is described below. The tags are specified in detail
in chapter 3.

[Event "International Amsterdam Airport Schiphol Bridgetournament"]
[Site "Amsterdam, The Netherlands NLD"]
[Date "1995.06.10"]
[Board "1"]
[West "Podgor"]
[North "Westra"]
[East "Kalish"]
[South "Leufkens"]
[Dealer "N"]
[Vulnerable "None"]
[Deal "N:.63.AKQ987.A9732 A8654.KQ5.T.QJT6 J973.J98742.3.K4 KQT2.AT.J6542.85"]
[Scoring "IMP"]
[Declarer "S"]
[Contract "5HX"]
[Result "9"]
{
                S
                H 6 3
                D A K Q 9 8 7
                C A 9 7 3 2
S K Q 10 2                      S A 8 6 5 4
H A 10                          H K Q 5
D J 6 5 4 2                     D 10
C 8 5                           C Q J 10 6
                S J 9 7 3
                H J 9 8 7 4 2
                D 3
                C K 4   
}
[Auction "N"]
1D      1S   3H =1= 4S
4NT =2= X    Pass   Pass
5C      X    5H     X
Pass    Pass Pass
[Note "1:non-forcing 6-9 points, 6-card"]
[Note "2:two colors: clubs and diamonds"]
[Play "W"]
SK =1= H3 S4 S3
C5 C2 C6 CK
S2 H6 S5 S7
C8 CA CT C4
D2 DA DT D3
D4 DK H5 H7
-  -  -  H2
*
[Note "1:highest of series"]


1.3  Relationship to PGN
------------------------
  PBN is derived from "Portable Game Notation" (PGN).  Although the name
PGN suggest that it is a standard for arbitrary games, it is dedicated for
representing chess games.  PGN has been very successful.  There are already
many chess programs that understand PGN, and PGN databases with thousands
of games are publicly available.
  The specification of PGN can be downloaded from
http://www.iae.nl/users/veugent/pgn.zip .
  One standard, namely the "Portable Draughts Notation" (PDN), has already
been derived from PGN.  Board games like chess and draughts have much
similarity, so the derivation of PDN from PGN was straightforward.
  The derivation of PBN from PGN is less straightforward for the following
reasons:
  - the number of players is 4 instead of 2
  - the "initial position", i.e.  the cards, must be given
  - the auction must be described, and possibly some calls must be
    explained
  - the "moves", i.e. the calls and the played cards, must be described
    as two separate sections. The moving player must be indicated.


2.  File layout
---------------
  A PBN file contains one or more text lines. A text line consists of
zero or more visible characters. An empty text line has zero visible
characters. A visible character is defined as a character that a user
can edit. A text line also contains non-visible characters, needed to
represent a text line.  The representation of a text line differs among
platforms.  The non-visible characters can be linefeeds, carriage returns,
zero bytes, padding bytes or even bytes telling the length of a line.


2.1  Import format and export format
------------------------------------
  The PBN standard discerns two formats:  the "import" format and the
"export" format.
  The import format is rather flexible and is used to describe data that
may have been prepared by hand.  The order of tags is unimportant; the use
of (superfluous) tabs and space characters does not matter, etc.  A PBN
file in import format can have text lines according to the platform's
native line representation.  A PBN parser should be able to handle a PBN
file with import format, that has been created on a computer, the parser is
running on.
  The export format is rather strict and is used to describe data that is
usually prepared under program control.  A file with export format can be
read by a PBN parser on any computer!  So, a PBN parser with the capability
of writing a PBN file in export format guarantees the portability of PBN
files.


2.2  Character set
------------------
  PBN data is represented using a subset of the eight bit ISO 8859/1 (Latin
1) character set.  ("ISO" is an acronym for the International Standards
Organization.) This set is also known as ECMA-94 and is similar to other
ISO Latin character sets.  ISO 8859/1 includes the standard seven bit ASCII
character set for the 32 control character code values from zero to 31.
The 95 printing character code values from 32 to 126 are also equivalent to
seven bit ASCII usage.  (Code value 127, the ASCII DEL control character,
is a graphic character in ISO 8859/1; it is not used for PBN data
representation.)
  The 32 ISO 8859/1 code values from 128 to 159 are non-printing control
characters.  They are not used for PBN data representation.  The 32 code
values from 160 to 191 are mostly non-alphabetic printing characters and
their use for PBN data is discouraged as their graphic representation
varies considerably among other ISO Latin sets.  Finally, the 64 code
values from 192 to 255 are mostly alphabetic printing characters with
various diacritical marks; their use is encouraged for those languages that
require such characters.  The graphic representations of this last set of
64 characters is fairly constant for the ISO Latin family.
  Printing character codes outside of the seven bit ASCII range may only
appear in string data and in commentary.  They are not permitted for use in
symbol construction.
  The horizontal tab and vertical tab are permitted.  No other ASCII
control characters are permitted, except for the (non-visible) control
characters for the line representation.

  Because some PBN users' environments may not support presentation of
non-ASCII characters, PBN game authors should refrain from using such
characters in critical commentary or string values in game data that may be
referenced in such environments.  PBN software authors should have their
programs handle such environments by displaying a question mark ("?") for
non-ASCII character codes.  This is an important point because there are
many computing systems that can display eight bit character data, but the
display graphics may differ among machines and operating systems from
different manufacturers.


2.3  Line specification
-----------------------
  A text line contains any characters from the allowed character set.
However, tab characters may not appear inside of string data.
  The export format obeys some additional rules.  In export format a text
line contains printing characters concluded by an end-of-line indicator.
This end-of-line indicator equals the CRLF character-pair consisting of the
ASCII control character CR (Carriage Return, decimal value 13, hexadecimal
value 0x0d) and the ASCII control character LF (LineFeed, decimal value 10,
hexadecimal value 0x0a).
  Tab characters, both horizontal and vertical, are not permitted in the
export format.  This is because the treatment of tab characters is highly
dependent upon the particular software in use on the host computing system.

  The length of a PBN text line is maximally 255 characters, including the
non-visible characters, especially the end-of-line indicator.  Lines with
80 or more printing characters are strongly discouraged because of the
difficulties experienced by common text editors with long lines.


2.4  Escape mechanism
---------------------
  The escape character "%" in the first column means that the rest of the
line can be ignored.  A percent sign appearing in any other place other
than the first position in a line does not trigger the escape mechanism.
  The escape convention can be applied to embed non-PBN commands and data
in PBN streams. In PBN, there are two proposed uses:

 (1) It indicates the version of the PBN standard used by a computer
     program.  The syntax is:
% PBN <major version #>.<minor version #>

 (2) It indicates that a PBN file has export format. The syntax is:
% EXPORT


3.  Game layout
---------------
  A PBN file contains zero or more PBN games.  Each game, except for the
first game, starts with a semi-empty line.  A semi-empty line is either
an empty text line (no characters), or a line having only spaces and/or tab
characters.  In export format, each game (except for the first) must start
with an empty text line.
  So, a parser (and a human) knows that after a semi-empty line a new game
begins.  There is one exception to this situation, namely a comment
(chapter 3.8) may include semi-empty lines that do not end the game.
  Every game contains all its required data.  Several games in a database
file may contain identical information.  This costs more bytes, but the
syntax can be kept simple to cope with a large diversity of databases. A
PBN file does not have a header with general file information.


3.1  Game sections
------------------
A PBN game consists of several sections:
 (1) the identification section,
 (2) the auction section,
 (3) the play section, and
 (4) supplemental sections.

  The identification section provides information that identifies the game
by defining the values associated with a set of standard parameters.
  The auction section gives the optionally annotated bids.  It starts with
tag name 'Auction' and ends at the next tag or the end of the game.  The
auction section is optional.  The outcome of the auction can be given by
the tags 'Declarer' and 'Contract'. If the auction section is present,
then the tag 'Dealer' must be filled before the auction section.
  The play section shows the played cards.  It starts with tag name 'Play'
and ends at the next tag or the end of the game.  The play section is
optional.  If the play section is present, then the tags 'Deal', 'Declarer'
and 'Contract' must be filled before the play section.
  The supplemental sections are optional sections containing tables or
user defined sections.

  In import format, no tags are mandatory.  The tags can be given in any
order.  As indicated above, in case of an auction section or a play section
the needed tags and their order are prescribed.
  In export format, the sections must be given in the above order.  The
supplemental sections are sorted alphabetically by their tag name.  The
identification section contains 15 mandatory tags.


3.2  Tokens
-----------
  PBN character data is organized as tokens.  A token represents a basic
semantic unit.  A token consists of a contiguous sequence of printing
characters belonging to the allowed character set.  Tokens may be separated
from adjacent tokens by white space characters.  (White space characters
include space, newline, and tab characters.) A white space character can
never be part of a token.  As a consequence, a token does not cross a text
line boundary, and its length is limited to a maximum of 255 characters.
  Some tokens are self delimiting and do not require white space characters
to separate them from the next token.

  The left and right bracket characters ("[" and "]") are tokens.  They are
used to delimit tag pairs (see below).  Both tokens are self terminating.

  A name token consists of one or more name characters.  These name
characters are letter characters ("A-Za-z"), digit characters ("0-9"), and
the underscore ("_").  All characters in a name are significant.  A name
token is terminated just prior to the first non-name character.

  A string token is a sequence of zero or more printing characters
delimited by a pair of quote characters (ASCII decimal value 34,
hexadecimal value 0x22).  An empty string is represented by two adjacent
quotes.  (Note:  an apostrophe is not a quote.) A quote inside a string is
represented by the backslash immediately followed by a quote.  A backslash
inside a string is represented by two adjacent backslashes.  Strings are
commonly used as tag pair values (see below).  A string token is terminated
by its closing quote.  Note that, non-printing characters like newline and
tab are not permitted inside of strings, because a string is a special case
of a token.

  A call token is a sequence of one or more letter characters ("A-Za-z"),
digit characters ("0-9"), and the hyphen character ("-").  A call token is
terminated just prior to the first non-call character.  The call tokens are
defined in chapter 3.5.1 .

  A card token is a sequence of one or more letter characters ("A-Za-z"),
digit characters ("0-9"), and the hyphen character ("-").  A card token is
terminated just prior to the first non-card character.  The card tokens are
defined in chapter 3.6.1 .

  A suffix token consists of one or two exclamation marks "!" and/or
question marks "?".  A suffix token is terminated after the second suffix
character, or just prior to the first non-suffix character.

  A note token is a sequence of one or more digit characters ("0-9")
preceded as well as succeeded by the equal sign ("=").  This token
terminates just after the succeeding equal sign.

  A Numeric Annotation Glyph ("NAG", see below) is a token; it is composed
of a dollar sign character ("$") immediately followed by one or more digit
characters.  It is terminated just prior to the first non-digit character
following the digit sequence.

  An asterisk character ("*") is a token by itself.  It is used as 
a termination marker of an incomplete auction section or an incomplete
play section.  The token is self terminating.

  A plus character ("+") is a token by itself.  It is used to denote
the next call in an auction that must be continued, or to denote the next
card of a play that must be continued.  The token is self terminating.

  An irregularity token starts with the caret character ("^") and is
followed by one of the characters "I", "S", "R", or "L".  This token
terminates just after the second character.

  A section token is a sequence of one or more ASCII characters from 33 to
126 with the exclusion of '[' , ']' , '{' , '}' , ';' , '"' , '%'.  This
limited set of characters is needed to prevent problems in parsing a
supplemental section.  The excluded characters are used for indicating tag
pairs, comments, string tokens, and the escape mechanism.  The backslash is
allowed, but has no special meaning.

  A column name token is a sequence of zero or more printing characters
with the exception of ';' , because it serves as separator between 2 column
name tokens.  The first character '+' or '-' has a special meaning:  it
indicates the order in the column. Also character '\' in the column name
token has a special meaning: it must be followed by an integer that
represents the minimum width of the data in the column. Optionally, this
integer can be followed by 'L' or 'R' to indicate left or right alignment
of column data.


3.3  Tag pair
-------------
  The tag pair (or shortly 'tag') is the basic information unit.  A tag
pair is composed of four consecutive tokens:  a left bracket token, a name
token, a string token, and a right bracket token.  The name token is the
tag name and the string token is the tag value associated with the tag
name.  (There is a standard set of tag names and semantics described
below.)
  Tag names are case sensitive.  All tag names begin with an upper case
letter.
  For PBN import format, there may be zero or more white space characters
between any adjacent pair of tokens in a tag pair.
  For PBN export format, there are no white space characters between the
left bracket and the tag name, there are no white space characters between
the tag value and the right bracket, and there is a single space character
between the tag name and the tag value.
  PBN import format may have multiple tag pairs on the same line and may
even have a tag pair spanning more than a single line.  Export format
requires each tag pair to appear left justified on a line by itself.
  Some tag values may be composed of a sequence of items.  For example, a
game may have more than one annotator.  When this occurs, the single
character ";" (semicolon) appears between adjacent items.


3.4  Identification section
---------------------------
  The identification section contains all the tag pairs, that are not
involved with the auction section and the play section.
  There is a set of 15 tags defined for storage of PBN data, called
Mandatory Tag Set (MTS).  These tags are mandatory for a PBN file in export
format.  The MTS is the common ground that all programs should follow for
public data interchange.  When a tag value of a mandatory tag is unknown
(because it was not given in the import format), then the tag is given with
tag value "?".  When a tag value of a mandatory tag is inappropriate (e.g.
a dealing program only gives the tags 'Dealer', 'Vulnerable', and 'Deal'),
then the tag is given as an empty string.
  For import format, the order of tag pairs is not important.  For export
format, the order of tag pairs is:
 (1) the mandatory tags in a fixed order
 (2) the supplemental tags, sorted alphabetically by their tag name

The 15 tag names of the MTS are (in order):
 (1) Event      (the name of the tournament or match)
 (2) Site       (the location of the event)
 (3) Date       (the starting date of the game)
 (4) Board      (the board number)
 (5) West       (the west player)
 (6) North      (the north player)
 (7) East       (the east player)
 (8) South      (the south player)
 (9) Dealer     (the dealer)
(10) Vulnerable (the situation of vulnerability)
(11) Deal       (the dealt cards)
(12) Scoring    (the scoring method)
(13) Declarer   (the declarer of the contract)
(14) Contract   (the contract)
(15) Result     (the result of the game)

  In export format, tag pairs may only occur once.  In import format, a tag
pair that already occurred, is ignored.

3.4.1  The Event tag
--------------------
  The Event tag value should be reasonably descriptive.  Abbreviations are
to be avoided unless absolutely necessary.  A consistent event naming
should be used to help facilitate database scanning.

3.4.2  The Site tag
-------------------
  The Site tag value should include city and region names along with a
standard name for the country.  The use of the ISO 3166 (or, EN 23166)
three letter names (instead of the country name) is suggested for those
countries where such codes are available.  A comma may be used to separate
a city from a region.  No comma is needed to separate a city or region from
the ISO 3166 country code.
  The ISO 3166 standard is continuously updated.  A copy can be found on
the PBN homepage.

3.4.3  The Date tag
-------------------
  The Date tag value gives the starting date for the game.  (Note: this is
not necessarily the same as the starting date for the event.) The date is
given with respect to the local time of the site given in the Event tag.
The Date tag value field always uses a standard ten character format:
"YYYY.MM.DD".  The first four characters are digits that give the year, the
next character is a period, the next two characters are digits that give
the month, the next character is a period, and the final two characters are
digits that give the day of the month.  If any of the digit fields are not
known, then question marks are used in place of the digits.

3.4.4  The Board tag
--------------------
  The Board tag value is a positive integer, indicating the board number of
the deal.

3.4.5  The West tag
-------------------
  The West tag value is the name of the player or players at the West
direction.  The names are given as they would appear in a telephone
directory.  The family or last name appears first.  If a first name or
first initial is available, it is separated from the family name by a comma
and a space.  Finally, one or more middle initials may appear.  (Wherever a
comma appears, the very next character should be a space.  Wherever an
initial appears, the very next character should be a period.)
  The intent is to allow meaningful ASCII sorting of the tag value that is
independent of regional name formation customs.  If more than one person is
playing West, the names are listed in alphabetical order and are separated
by the semicolon character between adjacent entries.  A player who is also
a computer program should have appropriate version information listed after
the name of the program.

3.4.6  The North tag
--------------------
  The North tag value is the name of the player or players at the North
direction.  The names are given here as they are for the West tag value.

3.4.7  The East tag
--------------------
  The East tag value is the name of the player or players at the East
direction.  The names are given here as they are for the West tag value.

3.4.8  The South tag
--------------------
  The South tag value is the name of the player or players at the South
direction.  The names are given here as they are for the West tag value.

3.4.9  The Dealer tag
---------------------
  The Dealer tag value is the direction of the game's dealer. The tag value
is "W" (West), "N" (North), "E" (East), or "S" (South).

3.4.10  The Vulnerable tag
--------------------------
  The Vulnerable tag value defines the situation of vulnerability. The
following tag values are possible:
    "None" , "Love" or "-"  no vulnerability
    "NS"                    North-South vulnerable
    "EW"                    East-West vulnerable
    "All" or "Both"         both sides vulnerable
  In export format the tag values "None" and "All" are applied.

3.4.11  The Deal tag
--------------------
  The Deal tag value gives the cards of each hand.  The tag value is
defined as "<first>:<1st_hand> <2nd_hand> <3rd_hand> <4th_hand>".  The 4
hands are given in clockwise rotation.  A space character exists between
two consecutive hands.  The direction of the <1st_hand> is indicated by
<first>, being W (West), N (North), E (East), or S (South).  The cards of
each hand are given in the order:  spades, hearts, diamonds, clubs.  A dot
character "." exists between two consecutive suits of a hand.  The cards of
a suit are given by their ranks.  The ranks are defined as (in descending
order):
    A , K , Q , J , T , 9 , 8 , 7 , 6 , 5 , 4 , 3 , 2.
  Note that the 'ten' is defined as the single character "T". If a hand
contains a void in a certain suit, then no ranks are entered at the place
of that suit.
  Not all 4 hands need to be given. A hand whose cards are not given, is
indicated by "-" . For example, only the east/west hands are given:
[Deal "W:KQT2.AT.J6542.85 - A8654.KQ5.T.QJT6 -"]
  In import format, the ranks of a suit can be given in any order; the
value of <first> is free.  In export format, the ranks must be given in
descending order; <first> is equal to the dealer.

3.4.12  The Scoring tag
-----------------------
  This tag gives the used scoring method. It is an essential part of
the game since the tactics of the players depend on the scoring method.
  There are a lot of scoring systems with all kind of variations, refer
to Bridge Encyclopedia.  New scoring systems evolve for coping with all
kind of irregularities, see e.g.:
  http://www.gallery.uunet.be/hermandw/bridge/hermtd.html.
  The wealth of scoring systems makes standardisation difficult.
Therefore, the specification of the tag value is open ended:  only
example values are given.  The tag value consists of fields separated by
semicolons.  A field indicates either a basic scoring system or a modifier.
Examples of basic scoring systems are:
    MP           MatchPoint scoring
    MatchPoints  identical to 'MP'
    IMP          IMP scoring (since 1962)
    Cavendish    Cavendish scoring
    Chicago      Chicago scoring
    Rubber       Rubber scoring
    BAM          Board-A-Match
    Instant      apply InstantScoreTable
Examples of modifiers are:
    Butler    the trick point score is IMPed against the average value
              of all scores
    Butler-2  as 'Butler', but the 2 extreme scores are not used in
              computing the average value
    Experts   the trick point score is IMPed against a datum score
              determined by experts
    Cross     the trick point score is IMPed against every other
              trick point score, and summed
    Cross1    value of 'Cross' , divided by number of scores
    Cross2    value of 'Cross' , divided by number of comparisons
    Mean      the datum score is based on a (normal) average value
    Median    the datum score is based on the median value
    MP1       MatchPoints are computed as:  the sum of points, constructed
              by earning 2 points for each lower score, 1 point for each
              equal score, and 0 points for each higher score.
    MP2       MatchPoints are computed as:  the sum of points, constructed
              by earning 1 point for each lower score, 0.5 points for each
              equal score, and 0 points for each higher score.
    OldMP     NO bonus of 100 (Doubled) or 200 (Redoubled) for the fourth
              and each subsequent undertrick, when not vulnerable
    Mitchell2 see http://www.gallery.uunet.be/hermandw/bridge/hermtd.html
    Mitchell3 idem
    Mitchell4 idem
    Ascherman idem
    Bastille  idem
    EMP       European MatchPoints
    IMP_1948  IMP scoring used between 1948 and 1960
    IMP_1961  IMP scoring revised in 1961

3.4.13  The Declarer tag
------------------------
  The Declarer tag value is the direction of the declarer of the contract.
The tag value is "W" (West), "N" (North), "E" (East), or "S" (South).
  The Declarer tag can also cope with the irregularity that the declarer
and the dummy are swapped.  This may happen when e.g. South is declarer,
but by accident East plays the first card and South puts his cards on the
table.  The tag value becomes a caret (^) followed by the direction of the
irregular declarer:  "^W", "^N", "^E", resp. "^S".
  When all 4 players pass, then the tag value is an empty string.

3.4.14  The Contract tag
------------------------
  The Contract tag value can be "Pass" when all players pass, or a 'real'
contract defined as:  "<k><denomination><risk>"
with
    <k>             the number of odd tricks, <k> = 1 .. 7
    <denomination>  the denomination of the contract, being S (spades),
                    H (Hearts), D (Diamonds), C (Clubs), or NT (NoTrump)
    <risk>          the risk of the contract, being void (undoubled),
                    X (doubled), or XX (redoubled)

3.4.15  The Result tag
----------------------
  The Result tag value gives the result of the game in number of tricks.
The possible tag values are:
    "<result>"                 number of tricks won by declarer
    "EW <result>"              number of tricks won by EW
    "NS <result>"              number of tricks won by NS
    "EW <result> NS <result>"  number of tricks won by EW resp. by NS
    "NS <result> EW <result>"  number of tricks won by NS resp. by EW
with <result> = 0 .. 13 .
  The <result> must match the actual number of won tricks.  However, the
players could accidentally agree on a wrong number of tricks.  A caret
character ("^") preceding one of the above tag values indicates that the
<result> differs from the actual number of won tricks.
  When all 4 players pass, then the tag value is an empty string.
  In export format the tag value contains the number of tricks won by
declarer.
  The Result tag normally gives the final result after the play has ended.
This is the case when all 52 cards have been played, or when the Play
section ends with '*'.  The Result tag can also be used to give a partial
result.  When the play has not ended, then the Result tag indicates the
number of won tricks for the completed, played tricks in the play section.
  Usage of '+' in the play section would make it explicitly clear that the
Result tag is based on a partial result.


3.5  Auction section
--------------------
  The auction section gives the calls, together with the optional
annotation.  The start of the auction section is indicated by the tag pair
with tag name 'Auction'.  The Auction tag is followed by multiple auction
lines containing the calls.  The direction of the player making the first
call is given as tag value in the Auction tag pair:  "W" (West), "N"
(North), "E" (East), or "S" (South).
  In export format this player is always the dealer.  Each auction line
contains 4 calls.  Only due to much annotation, a line may contain less
than 4 calls.  The call of the dealer always starts left justified at a new
line.
  In import format the player in the Auction tag value need not be the
dealer.  For example, the calls are given in a table of 4 columns with West
in the first column.  In that case, each player before the dealer has a
hyphen ("-") in the first auction line.
  The auction section ends with all passes, or with "*" .  The "*"
character indicates that no further calls will or can be given.  In this
case, the result of the auction can be given in the tags 'Declarer' and
'Contract'.
  It is also possible that the auction has not been completed yet, with the
intention to continue another time.  For example, a game might be saved in
a PBN file so that another computer program might make the next call.  The
'+' character is used to indicate explicitly this intention.  The '+'
replaces the next call to be made. Hence, it is placed after the last
call (and its annotations).  At the continuation, the '+' will be replaced
by the made call, and possibly a new '+' can be inserted. In this situation,
the '*' character is forbidden to end the auction section.  The usage of '+'
is not obligatory, only recommended.

3.5.1  Auction call
-------------------
  A call is represented by a call token.  The possibilities of a call token
are:
    AP                 all players pass
    Pass               the player passes
    X                  the player doubles
    XX                 the player redoubles
    <k><denomination>  the player bids a contract, where <k> and 
                       <denomination> are defined as in the Contract tag
    -                  it is not yet player's turn to make a call

3.5.2  Auction annotations
--------------------------
  In import format, the following annotations can be added after each call,
namely:
    (1) at most one suffix annotation
    (2) at most one note reference
    (3) zero or more NAGs

  These annotations are described below.  In import format, the annotations
can be given in any order.  In export format, the order is:  the optional
note reference, and then the NAGs in increasing order of the NAG values.
The optional suffix has been translated into the corresponding NAG (chapter
3.7).  For example, in an import format PBN file the construction
'1S !! =1= $25' becomes in export format '1S =1= $3 $25'.

3.5.3  Auction suffix
---------------------
  Import format PBN allows for the use of suffix annotations for calls.  A
suffix token exists for each suffix annotation.  There are exactly six such
annotations available:
     !  good call
     ?  poor call
    !!  very good call
    ??  very poor call
    !?  speculative call
    ?!  questionable call
  These suffixes correspond with the NAG values $1 - $6.  A one-to-one
correspondence is needed, because the suffixes are translated to NAG values
for the export format.

3.5.4  Auction note reference
-----------------------------
  A call can be followed by at most one note reference. A note is used
for indicating alerts (e.g. transfer bids).  PBN does not distinguish
between partner-alerts and self-alerts.
  The note reference is given by means of a note token, defined as an
integer surrounded by equal signs:  =<note_index>=
The value of <note_index> lies between 1 and 32.  Several calls may use the
same note reference.
  In export format, a single space character is entered after the note
reference, if it is followed by another token in the text line.

3.5.5  Auction note explanation
-------------------------------
  An auction note reference with index <note_index> is explained in a note
tag.  This note tag has tag name 'Note', and the tag value of the note tag
equals:  "<note_index>:<note_text>"
   Note tags may occur more than once (unlike other tags).  They must
differ in the value of the <note_index>.
  The note tags, dedicated to the auction, are placed in the auction
section at the end of the auction calls.  They may not be placed in the
identification section, nor the play section.


3.6  Play section
-----------------
  The play section gives the played cards, together with the optional
annotation.  The start of the play section is indicated by the tag pair
with tag name 'Play'.  The Play tag is followed by multiple play lines
containing the played cards.  The direction of the player playing the first
card is given as tag value in the Play tag pair:  "W" (West), "N" (North),
"E" (East), or "S" (South).
  In export format this player is always the opening leader, being
declarer's left hand opponent.  Each play line contains 4 cards.  Only due
to much annotation, a line may contain less than 4 cards.  The card of the
opening leader always starts left justified at a new line.  A dash '-' is
used for each card that is unknown or that has not been played (yet).
  The play section ends after 13 tricks, or with "*" .  The "*" character
indicates that no further cards will or can be given.  In this case, the
result of the play can be given in the tags 'Result'.
  It is also possible that the play has not been completed yet, with the
intention to continue another time.  For example, a game might be saved in
a PBN file so that another computer program might play the next card.  The
'+' character is used to indicate explicitly this intention.  The '+'
replaces the next card to be played. At the continuation, the '+' will be
replaced by the played card, and possibly a new '+' can be inserted. 
Note that the '+' need not be the last character in the Play section,
e.g. in the fragment:
[Play "W]
H2   H3   H4   HA
+    -    -    CQ
South has played the last card, and the game must be continued by West
playing the next card.
  The usage of '+' is not obligatory, only recommended.  When '+' is not
used, then instead a '-' must be used to represent the card to be played.

3.6.1  Play card
----------------
  A card is represented by a card token.  The possibilities of a card token
are:
    -                  the played card does not matter
    <suit><rank>       the played card
with
    <suit> = S , H , D , C
    <rank> = A , K , Q , J , T , 9 , 8 , 7 , 6 , 5 , 4 , 3 , 2.

3.6.2  Play annotations
-----------------------
  The play annotations are analogous to the auction annotations.
  In import format, the following annotations can be added after each card,
namely:
    (1) at most one suffix annotation
    (2) at most one note reference
    (3) zero or more NAGs

  These annotations are described below.  In import format, the annotations
can be given in any order.  In export format, the order is:  the optional
note reference, and then the NAGs in increasing order of the NAG values.
The optional suffix has been translated into the corresponding NAG (chapter
3.7).  For example, in an import format PBN file the construction
'SK !! =1= $200' becomes in export format 'SK =1= $9 $200'.

3.6.3  Play suffix
------------------
  The play suffixes are analogous to the auction suffixes.
  Import format PBN allows for the use of suffix annotations for played
cards.  A suffix token exists for each suffix annotation.  There are
exactly six such annotations available:
     !  good card
     ?  poor card
    !!  very good card
    ??  very poor card
    !?  speculative card
    ?!  questionable card
  These suffixes correspond with the NAG values $7 - $12.  A one-to-one
correspondence is needed, because the suffixes are translated to NAG values
for the export format.

3.6.4  Play note reference
--------------------------
  The play note references are analogous to the auction note references.
  A card can be followed by at most one note reference. A note is used
for indicating lead conventions, signals, etc.
 The note reference is given by means of a note token, defined as an
integer surrounded by equal signs:  =<note_index>=
The value of <note_index> lies between 1 and 32.  Several cards may use the
same note reference.
  In export format, a single space character is entered after the note
reference, if it is followed by another token in the text line.

3.6.5  Play note explanation
----------------------------
  The play note explanations are analogous to the auction note explanations.
  A play note reference with index <note_index> is explained in a note
tag.  This note tag has tag name 'Note', and the tag value of the note tag
equals:  "<note_index>:<note_text>"
   Note tags may occur more than once (unlike other tags).  They must
differ in the value of the <note_index>.
  The note tags, dedicated to the played cards, are placed in the play
section at the end of the played cards.  They may not be placed in the
identification section, nor the auction section.


3.7  Numeric Annotation Glyphs
------------------------------
  An NAG (Numeric Annotation Glyph) is an element that is used to indicate
a simple annotation in a language independent manner.  The NAG token
consists of the dollar sign ("$") followed by a non-negative decimal
integer.  The value of this integer must be between zero and 255.
  In export format, a single space character is entered after the NAG if
it is followed by another token in the text line.

Note:  the number assignments listed below should be considered preliminary
in nature; they are likely to be changed as a result of reviewer feedback.

NAG    Interpretation
---    --------------
  0    'no annotation'
  1    good call          (same as "!")
  2    poor call          (same as "?")
  3    very good call     (same as "!!")
  4    very poor call     (same as "??")
  5    speculative call   (same as "!?")
  6    questionable call  (same as "?!")
  7    good card          (same as "!")
  8    poor card          (same as "?")
  9    very good card     (same as "!!")
 10    very poor card     (same as "??")
 11    speculative card   (same as "!?")
 12    questionable card  (same as "?!")
 13    call has been corrected manually
 14    card has been corrected manually
 15    \
 ..    | used for commenting calls and played cards
255    /

  The NAG values $1 .. $6 and $13 may only be used for calls in the
auction section.  The values $7 .. $12 and $14 may only be used for played
cards in the play section.
  The NAG interpretations are available in a file called "pbn_eng.nag".
This file will be publicly available.  It is possible to construct similar
files in other languages.  In this way, the expandability of NAG values is
guaranteed.
  The format of the file is as follows.  The file consists of lines, ending
by the CRLF character.  Each line has the syntax:
    <NAG_value> <NAG_text>
The line begins with a left justified non-negative integer.  A single space
character separates the NAG value from the NAG text.


3.8  Commentary
---------------
  Comment text may appear in PBN data.  There are two kinds of comments.
The first kind is the 'rest of line' comment; this comment type starts with
a semicolon character ";" and continues to the end of the line.  The second
kind starts with a left brace character "{" and continues to the next right
brace character "}".  Comments cannot appear inside any token, nor inside a
tag pair.
  Brace comments do not nest; a left brace character appearing in a brace
comment loses its special meaning and is ignored.  A semicolon appearing
inside of a brace comment loses its special meaning and is ignored.  Braces
appearing inside of a semicolon comments lose their special meaning and are
ignored. Furthermore, inside a brace comment, "%" in the first column is
considered as a normal character, not as an escape character.
  Bridge comments often refer to a suit.  It would be nice to present a
suit by a graphical symbol.  The notation for a suit is defined as a
backslash folowed by the first character of the suit name.  Hence:
    \S = Spades, \H = Hearts, \D = Diamonds, \C = Clubs.
  The position of comments is important.  A comment refers to the preceding
event tag, auction call, played card, suffix, note reference, or nag.  Also
a comment can be positioned at the begin of the game (before any tag).  The
position of the comment must be preserved when a PBN file is converted from
import format to export format.  This holds especially when the order of
the tags is changed to obey the prescribed tag order in export format.  In
export format comments succeeding an event tag are printed at the begin of
a new line.  When a comment does not start at a new line, then a single
space preceeds the comment begin character ";" or "{".
  There are no rules for converting comments from import format to export
format.  A conversion program has the freedom to merge comments, etc.
After a conversion, the import file won't be used anymore; the export
file is used, and the reader observes the comments as they are.


3.9  Irregularities
-------------------
  Several irregularities may occur during the auction and the card playing.
An irregularity is considered a problem if it violates the "normal" bridge
rules.  Five problems have been identified:
(A) An insufficient bid, accepted by the opponents.
(B) A call out of rotation, accepted by the opponents.
(C) A revoke happened, without being noticed in time.
(D) A lead out of turn, accepted by the opponents.
(E) The declarer and the dummy are swapped, refer to chapter 3.4.13 .
NB. Irregular (re)double is impossible, and MUST be taken back.
    When an irregularity (an insufficient bid that has been rejected)
    is solved, then there is no problem for PBN. The solved irregularity
    and its consequences (e.g. partner must keep passing) can be described
    as comment.
The following notation handles the irregularity (A) - (D):
 ^I  preceding a bid indicates that the bid is insufficient (A)
 ^S  indicates that a player was not able to call, because another
     player has done a call out of rotation (B); the ^S replaces
     the skipped player's call
 ^R  preceding a card indicates a revoke (C)
 ^L  preceding a card indicates a lead out of turn (D). The remaining 3 cards
     are "normally" played in clockwise order after the erroneous lead. 
In the following examples West is dealer (situations (A) and (B)), or West
must play the lead card (situations (C) and (D)) :
(A) 1D  ^I 1C            West opens 1 Diamonds, North bids 1 Clubs
(B) ^S  1D               West is dealer, but North opens 1 Diamonds
    1D  ^S  2D           West opens 1 Diamonds, East  bids 2 Diamonds
    1D  ^S  ^I 1C        West opens 1 Diamonds, East  bids 1 Clubs
    1D  ^S  ^S  2D       West opens 1 Diamonds, South bids 2 Diamonds
    1D  ^S  ^S  ^I 1C    West opens 1 Diamonds, South bids 1 Clubs
(C) CA  ^R S6  C3  C4    West plays Clubs Ace, North discards Spades 6
(D) CA  C2  ^L C3  C4    East instead of West plays the first card in a trick


3.10  End positions
-------------------
  PBN can be used to describe end positions.  A game is considered an end
position when the maximum number of cards of each hand in the Deal tag is
less than 13.
  The trump is given by the Contract tag, but now the tag value only
contains the denomination (without number of odd tricks and without
risk) : S, H, D, C, NT.
  The tag value of the play section indicates the lead player at the first
trick.


3.11  Case sensitivity
----------------------
  PBN is case sensitive.  Suits, sides, ranks, etc are given by uppercase
characters.  In import format, lowercase characters are allowed, to ease
human input.  In export format, only uppercase characters are allowed.  The
following table shows the tags where lowercase characters can be used:
        Upper   Lower   Description     Tags
        -----   -----   -----------     ----
        W       w       West            Dealer, Deal, Declarer, Auction, Play
        N       n       North           Dealer, Deal, Declarer, Auction, Play
        E       e       East            Dealer, Deal, Declarer, Auction, Play
        S       s       South           Dealer, Deal, Declarer, Auction, Play
        S       s       Spades          Deal, Contract, Auction, Play
        H       h       Hearts          Deal, Contract, Auction, Play
        D       d       Diamonds        Deal, Contract, Auction, Play
        C       c       Clubs           Deal, Contract, Auction, Play
        NT      nt      NoTrump         Contract, Auction
        X       x       double          Contract, Auction
        XX      xx      redouble        Contract, Auction
        Pass    pass    Pass            Contract, Auction
        AP      ap      AllPass         Auction
        A       a       Ace             Deal, Play
        K       k       King            Deal, Play
        Q       q       Queen           Deal, Play
        J       j       Jack            Deal, Play
        T       t       Ten             Deal, Play
        None    none    no vuln.        Vulnerable
        Love    love    no vuln.        Vulnerable
        NS      ns      NS vuln.        Vulnerable
        EW      ew      EW vuln.        Vulnerable
        All     all     All vuln.       Vulnerable
        Both    both    All vuln.       Vulnerable


4.  Supplemental tags
---------------------
  The following tags can be used optionally.  They are not contained in the
mandatory set MTS.
  The title of each chapter contains the tag names. The tag value of each
tag is a string token without any restrictions unless stated otherwise.

4.1  Game related information
-----------------------------

4.1.1  Tag: Competition
-----------------------
  This tag describes the type of competition.  Examples tag values are:
    "Cavendish", "Chicago", "Individuals", "Pairs", "Rubber", "Teams".

4.1.2  Tag: DealId
------------------
  This tag identifies a deal by a unique value; no two PBN deals should
have the same tag value for DealId.  The syntax of the tag value is left
unspecified; typically, it will contain values from tags such as Round,
Board, Event, Date, Generator, etc.
  Adding this tag to games allows programs to easily find all games
belonging to the same deal, for instance to do comparisons for duplicate
scoring.  Usage is strongly recommended, when there is a chance that the
PBN games are copied in other PBN files.

4.1.3  Tag: Description
-----------------------
  The purpose of this tag is to give arbitrary game description.  It can be
used when no other tag is suited.

4.1.4  Tag: FrenchMP
--------------------
  This tag indicates if French scoring is used, default is 'No'.  The only
two possible tag values are:  "Yes" and "No".

4.1.5  Tag: Generator
---------------------
  This tag indicates how the cards have been generated. It is intended for
bridge computer programs and especially hand generators. The tag value may
include the name of the program and possibly a seed value.

4.1.6  Tag: Hidden
------------------
  This tag indicates the directions of the hands that should be hidden by a
viewer after the PBN game has been loaded.  The idea is to reveal the hands
on user request, after the user has solved some task using only the visible
cards.  The tag value is a sequence of characters representing the
directions to be hidden.  The possible characters are:  W (West), N
(North), E (East), and S (South). For example:  [Hidden "WE"]
means, that initially the cards of E/W must be hidden.

4.1.7  Tag: Room
----------------
  This tag can be used in a teams bridge tournament.  The only two possible
tag values are:  "Open" and "Closed".

4.1.8  Tag: Termination
-----------------------
  This takes a string that describes the reason for the conclusion of the
game.  While the Result tag gives the result of the game, it does not
provide any extra information and so the Termination tag is defined for
this purpose. Examples are:
    "abandoned"         abandoned game.
    "adjudication"      result due to third party adjudication process
    "death"             losing player called to greater things, one hopes
    "emergency"         game concluded due to unforeseen circumstances
    "normal"            game terminated in a normal fashion
    "rules infraction"	administrative forfeit due to losing player's
                        failure to observe either the Laws of Bridge or
                        the event regulations
    "time forfeit"      loss due to losing player's failure to meet time
                        control requirements
    "unterminated"      game not terminated


4.2  Score related information
------------------------------

4.2.1  Tag: Score
-----------------
  This tag gives the number of points of the game based on the trick score.
The score can be given in 5 possible formats:
    "<score>"                score of declarer
    "EW <score>"             score of EW
    "NS <score>"             score of NS
    "EW <score> NS <score>"  score of EW resp. NS
    "NS <score> EW <score>"  score of NS resp. EW
where <score> is the integer number of points.
  The score can deviate from the normal value due to irregularities. This
can be explained in commentary.

4.2.2  Tag: ScoreIMP
--------------------
  This tag gives the score in International MatchPoints based on the
difference between score points (given in tag Score).  The score can be
given in the 5 possible formats, defined in the Score tag.  Now, <score> is
the number of IMPs.  The value of <score> is normally an integer number.
It can also be a broken number due to averaging of IMP values.  In that
case, it is represented as a decimal number having a decimal dot.
  The modifiers in the Scoring tag specify how the IMPs are computed.

4.2.3  Tag: ScoreMP
-------------------
  This tag gives the MatchPoints based on the ranking of score points
(given in tag Score).  The score can be given in the 5 possible formats,
defined in the Score tag.  Now, <score> is the number of MatchPoints.  The
value of <score> is normally an integer number.  It can also be a broken
number due to averaging of MatchPoints values.  In that case, it is
represented as a decimal number having a decimal dot.
  The computation of the MatchPoints is computed as:  the sum of points,
constructed by earning 2 points for each lower score, 1 point for each
equal score, and 0 points for each higher score.
  This definition is indicated in the Scoring modifiers as 'MP1'.

4.2.4  Tag: ScorePercentage
---------------------------
  This tag gives the percentage score.  The score can be given in the 5
possible formats, defined in the Score tag.  Now, <score> is the
percentage, a decimal value between 0 and 100.

4.2.5  Tag: ScoreRubber
-----------------------
  This tag gives the game's score for Rubber bridge or Chicago bridge.  The
score can be given in the 5 possible formats, defined in the Score tag.
Now, <score> is defined as:
    <score> = <non-negative integer>/<non-negative integer>
where the integer before "/" is the score above-the-line (bonus points or
premium points), and the integer after "/" is the score below-the-line
(trick points).

4.2.6  Tag: ScoreRubberHistory
------------------------------
  This tag gives the scores above-the-line (bonus points or premium points)
and the scores below-the-line (trick points) for both sides at the beginning
of a deal in a rubber match. The syntax of the tag is:
  [ScoreRubberHistory "NS <HistoryScore> EW <HistoryScore>"]
Each <HistoryScore> consists of 3, 4 or 5 score units (being non-negative
integers), depending on the number of finished rubber games in the current
rubber. The syntax of <HistoryScore> is:
  <above_previous> <above_current>/<below-1> <below-2> <below-3>
where
  <above_previous>    all above-the-line points in previous rubbers (if any)
  <above_current>     all above-the-line points in the current rubber
  <below-n>           the below-the-line points, either at begin of the
                      current deal in game 'n' or at the end of finished
                      game 'n'
During the first game, the values for <below-2> and <below-3> are omitted.
During the second game, the values for <below-3> are omitted.
The slash "/" separates the scores above-the-line from the scores below-the-line
just as in tag ScoreRubber.
  Note that the number of games won defines the vulnerability. This must be
consistent with the Vulnerable tag (if present).

4.2.7	Tag: OptimumScore 
-----------------------
  This tag gives the optimum number of points of a deal based on the trick
score of the optimum result, with open cards (double dummy). This result is
computed by comparing all possible (doubled) contracts, including all passes.
The number of tricks for a certain contract - and hence the corresponding
score - may be derived from the OptimumResultTable.
  The optimum score can be given in 4 possible formats: 
    "EW <score>"              score of EW 
    "NS <score>"              score of NS 
    "EW <score> NS <score>"   score of EW resp. NS 
    "NS <score> EW <score>"   score of NS resp. EW 
where <score> is the integer number of points. Note that the NS <score> is
opposite to the EW <score>.  For example, if NS can make 3NT with 10 tricks
and 5D with 11 tricks with scores of 630 respectively 600 and EW can play
5C doubled for a score of -500 then NS's optimum score is 600.


4.3  Player related information
-------------------------------

4.3.1  Tags: BidSystemEW, BidSystemNS
-------------------------------------
  These tags describe the bidding system for each side.

4.3.2  Tags: PairEW, PairNS
---------------------------
  These tags describe the partnerships East/West and North/South.  Suitable
tag values are the names of the players, when it is unknown who is sitting
North, East, South, West.  Other suitable tag values are the values of the
PairId_NS and PairId_EW columns from the ScoreTables, or the values of the
PairId column from the TotalScoreTable.

4.3.3  Tags: WestNA, NorthNA, EastNA, SouthNA
---------------------------------------------
  These tags are the e-mail or network addresses of the players.

4.3.4  Tags: WestType, NorthType, EastType, SouthType
-----------------------------------------------------
  These tags describe the player types.  Two typical example tag values
are:
    "human"      a human player
    "program"    an algorithmic (computer) player


4.4  Event related information
------------------------------
  The following tags are used for providing additional information about
the event.

4.4.1  Tag: EventDate
---------------------
  This tag describes the starting date of the event. The used format is
the same as for the Date tag.

4.4.2  Tag: EventSponsor
------------------------
  This tag gives the name of the sponsor of the event.

4.4.3  Tag: HomeTeam
--------------------
  This tag gives the name of the home team.

4.4.4  Tag: Round
-----------------
  The Round tag value gives the playing round for the game.  The round
indicator consists of letter characters, digit characters and the
underscore.
  Some organizers employ unusual round designations and have multipart
playing rounds and sometimes even have conditional rounds.  In these cases,
a multipart round identifier can be made from a sequence of round
indicators separated by periods.  The leftmost indicator represents the
most significant playing round, and succeeding indicators represent playing
rounds in descending hierarchical order.

4.4.5  Tag: Section
-------------------
  This tag is used for the playing section of a tournament. Examples are
"Open", "Ladies" or "Reserve".

4.4.6  Tag: Stage
-----------------
  This tag is used for the stage of a multistage event. Examples are
"Preliminary" or "Semifinal".

4.4.7  Tag: Table
-----------------
  This tag identifies the table in a tournament.  The tag value will
normally be a positive integer.

4.4.8  Tag: VisitTeam
---------------------
  This tag gives the name of the visiting team.


4.5  Time and date related information
--------------------------------------
  The following tags assist with further refinement of the time and data
information associated with a game.

4.5.1  Tag: Time
----------------
  This uses a time-of-day value in the form "HH:MM:SS"; similar to the Date
tag except that it denotes the local clock time (hours, minutes, and
seconds) of the start of the game.  Note that colons, not periods, are used
for field separators for the Time tag value.  The value is taken from the
local time corresponding to the location given in the Site tag pair.

4.5.2  Tag: UTCDate
-------------------
  This tag is similar to the Date tag except that the date is given
according to the Universal Coordinated Time standard.

4.5.3  Tag: UTCTime
-------------------
  This tag is similar to the Time tag except that the time is given
according to the Universal Coordinated Time standard.


4.6  Time control
-----------------
  The following tags are used to help describe the time control used with
the game.

4.6.1  Tag: TimeControl
-----------------------
  This tag indicates how many games must be played within a certain time
limit.  The tag value has the syntax:  "<NrGames>/<NrMinutes>"
This means that the number of games, given by <NrGames>, must be finished
before a time in minutes, given by <NrMinutes>.
  For example:  [TimeControl "4/30"]
means, that 4 games must be finished in half an hour.
  When there is no time limit at all, then use "" as tag value.

4.6.2  Tag: TimeCall
--------------------
  This tag is used to limit the time for making a single call.  The tag
value is defined in number of seconds.
  This tag can typically be applied for computer programs.

4.6.3  Tag: TimeCard
--------------------
  This tag is used to limit the time for playing a single card.  The tag
value is defined in number of seconds.
  This tag can typically be applied for computer programs.


4.7  Miscellaneous
------------------
  These are tags that can be briefly described and that don't fit well
in other chapters.

4.7.1  Tag: Annotator
---------------------
  This tag identifies the annotator or annotators of the game.

4.7.2  Tag: AnnotatorNA
-----------------------
  This tag is the e-mail or network addresses of the annotator.

4.7.3  Tag: Application
-----------------------
  The intention of this tag is to fill in a particular application
(especially a computer program).  It can be used as an anchor for
Application specific data, that are added immediately after this tag in
comments.

4.7.4  Tag: Mode
----------------
  This tag gives the playing mode of the game.  Examples are:
    "EM"     electronic mail
    "IBS"    Internet Bridge Server
    "OKB"    OK Bridge
    "TABLE"  normal table
    "TC"     general telecommunication


4.8  Tag value inheritance
--------------------------
  A tag with the special tag value "#" inherits the tag value of the
corresponding tag in the nearest previous game.  This process repeats until
a tag has been found with a 'real' tag value different from "#".  If no
previous tag can be found, then the tag value is set to "".
  There are some exceptions to this feature.  The tag value "#" is
forbidden for the tags 'Dealer', 'Vulnerable', 'Deal', 'Declarer',
'Contract', 'Auction', 'Play', and the note tags in the auction section and
the play section.
  A program may show "#" on the user interface instead of the 'real'
inherited tag value.  The user should be aware of this.  Thanks to the
exceptions, the PBN game can still be played.
  This optional feature not only minimizes the file size.  It also stresses
that a PBN game is related to a previous PBN game.

  The concept of the tag value "#" is defined one step further.  When a tag
has a tag value beginning with ##, then the (optional) text after ## can be
interpreted as:  use this text in all subsequent games.  So, all the
subsequent games need not repeat the tag with a "#". This feature
minimizes the file size a lot more.
  The tags that are forbidden to use "#" (see above), are also forbidden to
use ##.
  The tags with ## at the top of the file can be seen as a header.  Such
tags can still redefine their tag value in the middle of the file.  The
redefined tag value need not begin with ##.
  Example:  at the top of the file, the date tag is given using ##.  At the
middle of the file the date tag is redefined because the next 24 boards are
played at the next day.
  Note that in export format a mandatory tag can be omitted when there is
a corresponding tag using ## in a previous game.


4.9  Expandability
------------------
  PBN is intended to be expandable.  Future versions can have new tag
pairs, that are a valuable addition to the current version.  When a PBN
file includes new tag pairs, then these tags might not be recognized by PBN
parsers.  A PBN parser is robust when it just skips such tags, and perhaps
shows a warning.
  The syntax of a tag is designed so that it must be able to parse any tag
without interpreting its contents.  The same remark holds for supplemental
sections (chapter 5).  The syntax of a section element allows a parser to
skip all the section data until a tag has been found or until the end of
the game.


4.10  Compatibility
-------------------
  The PBN standard is subject to change.  Newer versions clarify
ambiguities observed in applying the standard.  Also, usage of the PBN
standard indicates shortcomings in the possibilities of the PBN notation.
  The differences between the PBN versions lead to compatibility problems.
The intention is to restrict these problems to a minimum.
  Backward compatibility is maintained by the following rule:  a PBN file
complying to a certain PBN version must also be valid for any higher PBN
version.
  Forward compatibility can be guaranteed by honouring the expandability
feature.  This implies that the syntax of tags and sections must obey the
following rules.  The general syntax of a tag (as defined in chapter 3.3)
may not change.  And, the general syntax of a section (as defined in
chapter 5) may not change.


5.  Supplemental sections
-------------------------

5.1  General description
------------------------
  A supplemental section is a unit of information consisting of a tag pair
and section data following this tag pair.  In general, the section data
are so large that they don't fit in a tag value.
  The section data consist of so-called section elements. A section
element has 2 representations.  Either it is a string token, or a section
token.  A string token can be used for section data consisting of
characters, that are not allowed for section tokens.  Thanks to the double
quotes at the begin and end of the string token, it is clear where such a
section element begins and ends.
  The white space characters serve as separator between section elements.
Section tokens do not include white space characters.  The string token can
have spaces, and is used for e.g. names.
  Only the tag pair of the section may be followed by commentary.
Commentary after a section element is forbidden. To avoid confusion with
commentary, the characters ';' , '{' , and '}' are forbidden in section
tokens.
  In export format, all the section elements in one text line are separated
by a single space character. There is an exception to this rule, namely in
case of tables that specify a minimum column width.


5.2  Description of tables
--------------------------
  The supplemental sections below can be viewed as tables.  The section
data of tables have some additional characteristics.  For clearness' sake,
the section elements of tables are called table elements.
  The section data of a table are structured in rows and columns.  A table
element belongs to one row and one column.  The tag value of a table
describes the columns of the table's section data.  A table has at least 1
column.  The tag value consists of 1 or more column name tokens separated
by the semicolon ';' .
  Each table below has a set of predefined column names.  It is not needed
to use all these predefined columns, any subset is possible.  Furthermore,
it is allowed to add columns with user defined column names.  Such a name
may not have ';' since this character serves as separator.
  The rows of a table do not need to have a specific order.  In most cases
there will be a numerical order, e.g.  based on a score.  When the table
elements in a column have a descending or ascending order, then this can be
indicated explicitly by entering a '+' or '-' just before the column name.
The character '+' means descending (i.e. highest value at first row), and
the character '-' means ascending (i.e. lowest value at first row).
  The minimum width of the table elements in a column can be specified. This
is needed to format a table nicely in export format. The width is indicated
by entering at the end of the column name a backslash '\' followed by an
integer being the minimum width. Extra spaces must be added before/after
the table element to reach the minimum width. Optionally, the alignment can
be indicated. After the minimum width integer, character 'L' indicates left
alignment (only extra spaces after the table element), and 'R' indicates
right alignment (only extra spaces before the table element).
  An unknown table element is indicated by '?' , and an irrelevant table
element is indicated by '-' .  A table element representing an artificial
score value is preceded by the caret character ("^").
  In import format, there is no restriction on the number of table elements
in a text line.
  In export format, all the table elements of a row are contained in one
text line, and they are separated by a single space character. There can
be more than one space character, but only when a column has defined a
minimum column width.

  The following chapters describe the defined supplemental sections.  The
title of each chapter contains the tag name of the section.


5.3  ActionTable
----------------
  This table gives a scale of percentages for certain actions in a game.
Some comment in the game can indicate the user's task.  After the user has
made his choice, the table can be shown or even processed with the user's
input.  The possible actions are:
 (a)  Making a call.
      All previous calls are given ending with '+' .
 (b)  Playing a card (especially the first lead card).
      All previous played cards are given ending with '+' .
 (c)  Bidding a contract.
      Comment can be added to tell opponent bidding. So, the final
      contract might be declared by the opponents, possibly doubled.
  The predefined column names are:
    Rank                rank order of action
    Call                call as defined in auction section
    Card                card as defined in play section
    Declarer            declarer as defined in Declarer tag
    Contract            contract as defined in Contract tag
    Percentage          percentage for action

5.4  AuctionTimeTable
---------------------
  This table gives the thinking times of the calls during the auction. An
Auction section must be given before this table section. Each row gives the
thinking time of one call. The order of the thinking times is exactly the
same as the order of the call tokens in the Auction section.
  The predefined column names are:
    Time                thinking time for call
    TotalTime           total time since start of game
The syntax of these 2 fields equals (compare tag Time in chapter 4.5.1) :
    HH:MM:SS    hours:minutes:seconds , or
       MM:SS    minutes:seconds , or
          SS    seconds


5.5  InstantScoreTable
----------------------
  This table shows ranges of scores, so no contracts.  After playing a
game, the realised score can be looked up immediately in the table and
translated to a percentage.
  The score ranges do not overlap, and all the score ranges together
cover the whole score space.
  The predefined column names are:
    Rank                rank order of score
    ScoreRange_NS       <score_range> of NS
    ScoreRange_EW       <score_range> of EW
    IMP_NS              IMP score of NS
    IMP_EW              IMP score of EW
    Percentage_NS       percentage score of NS
    Percentage_EW       percentage score of EW
where <score_range> can be:
    <score>             score equal to <score> (as in Score tag)
    <score1>,*          scores higher than <score1>
    <score1>,<score2>   scores higher than <score1> and lower than <score2>
    *,<score2>          scores lower than <score2>


5.6	 OptimumPlayTable
---------------------
  This table shows all possible cards for optimum play based on the Contract
tag, with open cards (double dummy). The first row gives the optimum cards
of the opening leader at the first trick. Each next row gives the optimum
cards for the current player based on the actual, previously played cards
according to the Play section. The order of the rows corresponds with the
order of the cards being played. The optimum cards are given by their ranks
(A, K, Q, J, T, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2) for each suit. Character '-' means
that a suit has no optimum cards. So, the table has 4 predefined columns
with names:
    S    ranks of optimum cards of suit Spades
    H    ranks of optimum cards of suit Hearts
    D    ranks of optimum cards of suit Diamonds
    C    ranks of optimum cards of suit Clubs


5.7	 OptimumResultTable
----------------------
  This table shows the optimum result of a deal in number of tricks, with
open cards (double dummy). For each direction, being the declarer, and for
each denomination the maximum number of tricks is given based on optimum
declarer play and optimum defence. A full table consists of 20 rows. The
table has 3 predefined columns with names:
    Declarer        direction of declarer: W, N, E, S 
    Denomination    S, H, D, C, NT 
    Result          number of tricks won by declarer: 0 .. 13


5.8  PlayTimeTable
------------------
  This table gives the thinking times of the cards during the play. A Play
section must be given before this table section. Each row gives the thinking
time of one played card. The order of the thinking times is exactly the same
as the order of the card tokens in the Play section.
  The predefined column names are:
    Time                thinking time for card
    TotalTime           total time since start of game
The syntax of these 2 fields equals (compare tag Time in chapter 4.5.1) :
    HH:MM:SS    hours:minutes:seconds , or
       MM:SS    minutes:seconds , or
          SS    seconds


5.9  ScoreTable
---------------
  This table presents the duplicate game results of a tournament.  After
playing a game, the result can be compared with the games that have
actually been played in a tournament.
  The advantage is that a deal can be described in a single game without
auction and play section.  The input for such a game may come from a
tournament administration program.  When a game has an auction and
play section, then the game still occurs as entry in the ScoreTable.
  The predefined column names are:
    Rank                rank order of score; or best rank in case of ties
    PairId_NS           pair identification of NS players
    PairId_EW           pair identification of EW players
    Names_NS            <names> of NS players
    Names_EW            <names> of EW players
    Contract            as in Contract tag: <k><denomination><risk>
    Declarer            direction of declarer: W, N, E, S
    Result              number of tricks won by declarer
    Score_NS            trick score of NS
    Score_EW            trick score of EW
    IMP_NS              IMP score of NS
    IMP_EW              IMP score of EW
    MP_NS               MatchPoints score of NS
    MP_EW               MatchPoints score of EW
    Percentage_NS       percentage score of NS
    Percentage_EW       percentage score of EW
    Multiplicity        the multiplicity of the score
where <names> is defined as:  a string token containing the names of
the 2 players separated by ';' , or the name of the partnership.
  Also artificial scores due to irregularities can be included.  In such a
case, possibly enter '-' for the fields Contract, Declarer, and Result.


5.10  TotalScoreTable
--------------------
  This table shows the total scores of (a part of) a tournament that have
actually been realised.
  The predefined column names are:
    Rank                rank order of score; or best rank in case of ties
    PairId              pair identification of players
    Names               <names> of players (as defined in ScoreTable)
    TotalScore          cumulative value of scores
    TotalIMP            cumulative value of IMPs
    TotalMP             cumulative value of MatchPoints
    TotalPercentage     cumulative value of percentage
    MeanScore           mean value of scores
    MeanIMP             mean value of IMPs
    MeanMP              mean value of MatchPoints
    MeanPercentage      mean value of percentage
    NrBoards            the number of played games
    Multiplicity        the multiplicity of the score
In general, a mean value is averaged over the number of played games.


6.  File issues
---------------

6.1  File name
--------------
  A file with PBN games has extension .pbn .

6.2  File embedding
-------------------
  A PBN file or a part of it might be embedded in another document, e.g.
a HTML file, or a word-processor document.  In order to recognize the
PBN text in that document, a set of delimiters can be applied.  The
delimiter <PBN> signals the begin of the PBN text, and the delimiter
</PBN> signals the end of the PBN text.  (Note, that the characters '<'
and '>' are part of the delimiters.) The delimiters do not occur in a
PBN file itself.


7. PBN software
---------------
Refer to the PBN homepages:
    http://www.tistis.nl/pbn, and
    http://www.kolumbus.fi/sackab/kgb .
